Q: How can I run luola in fullscreen?

A: Run Luola with --fullscreen parameter.
  Fullscreen mode always works under windows. 
  And there are two possibilities how to do this under linux:
  1) Check that your X server and SDL supports the VidMode extension.
     Then take a look at your "Modes" in XF86Config.
     You should have something like this there:

     Subsection "Display"
       Depth       24
       Modes       "1024x768" "800x600" "640x480"
       ViewPort    0 0
     EndSubsection

     If everything is okay, just run luola with --fullscreen

   2) Run luola in framebuffer.
      If you have framebuffer support compiled into your kernel and SDL, you can
      run luola without the X server

Q: How can I enable the sounds?

A: In order to enable the sounds, you must pass --enable-sounds to ./configure.
   You must have SDL_Mixer installed in order to use sounds. (Preferrably
   version 1.2.1 or higher) Sounds are not compiled in by default because some
   distributions have problems with it. This seems to be a bug in SDL and not
   luola. The sounds will be compiled in by default when SDL's sound support is
   stable enough. If you have sounds compiled in, sounds work on your system but
   luola is quiet, check that you have sounds enabled from the startup options
   and audio settings menus.

Q: What does SDL_gfx do and how do I enable it?

A: SDL_gfx is compiled in by default, if available. To disable, pass
   --disable-sdl-gfx to configure script.
   When it is enabled, SDL_gfx drawing functions (such as pixel putting and
   line drawing) are used instead of Luola's internal ones.  This allows such
   graphical improvements as alpha blending (particles and menus look nicer),
   anti-aliasing (lines look nicer) and surface resizing with softening (V-Wing
   and Wings levels aren't as blocky as they are with luola's internal pixel
   resizer)

Q: I can get any background music!
   I get the error message Module format not recognized

A: The problem is in SDL_Mixer. You dont have support for the file type in
question compiled in. Check your SDL_Mixer installation, download the
necessary support libraries, recompile and reinstall.

